= Good reading list to build up to algebraic number theory? =
----

== Answer ==

== Introductory ===

A couple good ones to get started are:

* A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory - Ireland & Rosen
* Primes of the form x2+ny2 - David Cox

These will introduce a lot of the main ideas in a way that you can understand with only the basics of abstract algebra.

Having background in Galois Theory helps (you can use Dummit & Foote for a solid intro).

Cox's book is probably one of the best reads in the subject.

Then there are a few that introduce the basic formalism rigorously:

=== Basic Formalism ===

* First two/three chapters of Algebraic Number Theory - Neukirch
* Milne's Online Notes (PDF)
A Course in Arithmetic - Serre (PDF)

These cover the basics and can be found from many sources via amazon and google.

=== Specialized Materials ===

After this, you can look at some more specialized stuff, though the two main directions are:

1. Analytic Number Theory and 
2. Langlands Program

=== Specialized Reference Items ===

* Analytic Number Theory: Introduction to Analytic Number Theory - Apostal
* Local Fields: Local Fields - Serre
* Cyclotomic Fields: Introduction to Cyclotomic Fields - Washington
* Class Field Theory: Algebraic Number Theory - Cassels & Frolich, the final chapters of Neukirch, Artin 
* L-Functions: A Historical Approach - Snyder (PDF)
* Elliptic Curves: Rational Points on Elliptic Curves - Silverman (undergrad level), 
* The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves - Silverman
* Modular Forms: A First Course in Modular Forms - Diamond & Shurman, 
* Introduction to Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms - Koblitz, 
* Modular Functions and Modular Forms - Milne (PDF), 
* Automorphic Forms and Representations - Bump
* Langlands Program: (The theory that ties absolutely everything together) 
* An Introduction to Langlands Program - Various, 
* An Elementary Introduction to the Langlands Program - Gelbart (PDF)
* Prerequisites for the Langlands Program - Knapp (PDF) 

This has a basic overview of most everything encountered in algebraic number theory along with many more references.

== Note from Answerer ==

	"Check it out!
	This may be looking far into the future, for someone just getting into Algebraic Number Theory, but I figure it's good to have a reference to point people to.
	I have my own biases and preferences, if anyone else wants to add something, go for it!"

----

== Source ==
[Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/math/comments/2igtlq/good_reading_list_to_build_up_to_algebraic_number/)

== Tags ==
:ReferenceRequest:Mathematics:NumberTheory:Books:Reddit:ReadingList:
